Welcome back in this section we learned all about linked lists.
We learned how it doesn't come pre-built in a lot of languages such as javascript but it does in others.
That is because linked lists are low level data structures.
It's used a lot actually in other data structures like hash tables.
And as we will see in some of the upcoming ones such as stacks and Qs there we're going to talk about
it is a fundamental data structure that is very very useful and computer science and also a very popular
question when it comes to interviewing.
We learned that when it comes to linked list there's no random access in the sense that when looking
for something you have to actually traverse the list with hash tables we can't find things right away
with arrays that we can find things through indexes.
We have slow lookups we have to traverse through the list if we're searching for something.
However they are ordered on like hash tables and linked lists allow us to have this sort of order.
If we had a large number of items in and Ray and we keep adding to that array we'd have to have excessive
overhead costs copying the array in memory and doubling up the space when it reaches the limit to create
a larger array versus a linked list where we can have a fast insertion and fast deletion especially
once we have a reference to where we want to insert or delete that note.
This also becomes a really really fast when it's at the beginning of a list or the end of the list.
And we're going to see that coming up when we talk about stacks and Qs.
The primary reason to choose a linked list over something like an array is simplicity and ability to
grow and shrink as needed.
Now working with them as we saw can be a little bit weird and difficult to just manage all the pointers
in your head but they are pretty lightweight and self-contained in that they can be quite flexible as
well.
That's all you're going to see linked lists and a lot of places like implementing file systems on your
computer or even browser history right.
When you go back and forth on a browser.
You can think of that as a linked list because you can traverse one by one from one place to another
and to remember with our hash tables how we had this issue of collision.
And when we had a collision we had to do something like this where we combined John Smith and Sander
D into two nodes and the first snow pointing to the second note.
If we go back to our hash table data structure that we created if we scroll down to the set method where
we set a key and a value in the hash table we did a check here to check if this address exists.
And then afterwards we used an array to push our items in case we had multiple items when we had a collision
because sometimes we can set our hash table memory size to be a lot smaller like two.
And you might be able to see why now instead of using an array which every time we need to insert a
new item.
I mean it works because we're pushing to the end.
But if we had to delete an item on the hash table we'd have to shift the array which as you know is
very slow.
So we can modify this now to something like a linked list so that a delete becomes a lot easier than
if it was an array.
And that's something that I'll leave up to you but you should have a good sense of why these data structures
exist now and why you might want to use a linked list over an array.
We also added a another piece of the puzzle in our mind map.
We've talked about arrays about hash tables and now we talked about if you see over here linked lists
are singly and doubly linked lists with their Big-O notation.
And just a hint here as you can see the linked lists are related to something we're going to talk about
coming up.
That is trees and grass.
But at the end of the day we've just managed to add another data structure to our toolbelt as engineers.
Congratulations and let's learn about more data structures in the next video.
Buh-Bye.